CHAPTER XII.
DANGERS TO AVOID.
I cannot terminate these hints, often, I fear, too didactic and abrupt, upon the full
use of one's time to the great end of living, as distinguished from vegetating, without
briefly referring to certain dangers which lie in wait for the sincere aspirant towards
life.
The first is the terrible danger of becoming that most odious and least supportable of persons,
a prig.
Now a prig is a pert fellow who gives himself heirs of superior wisdom.
A prig is a pompous fool who has gone out for a ceremonial walk, and without knowing
it has lost an important part of his attire, namely, his sense of humour.
A prig is a tedious individual who, having made a discovery, is so impressed by his discovery
that he is capable of being gravely displeased because the entire world is not also impressed
by it.
Unconsciously to become a prig is an easy and a fatal thing.
Hence, when one sets forth on the enterprise of using all one's time, it is just as well
to remember that one's own time, and not other people's time, is the material with
which one has to deal.
That the earth rolled on pretty comfortably before one began to balance a budget of the
hours, and that it will continue to roll on pretty comfortably whether or not one succeeds
in one's new role of Chancellor of the Exchequer of Time.
It is as well not to chatter too much about what one is doing, and not to betray a too
pained sadness at the spectacle of a whole world deliberately wasting so many hours out
of every day, and therefore never really living.
It will be found, ultimately, that in taking care of one's self, one has quite all one
can do.
Another danger is the danger of being tied to a programme like a slave to a chariot.
One's programme must not be allowed to run away with one.
It must be respected, but it must not be worshipped as a fetish.
A programme of daily employ is not a religion.
This seems obvious, yet I know men whose lives are a burden to themselves, and a distressing
burden to their relatives and friends, simply because they have failed to appreciate the
obvious.
Oh, no, I have heard the martyred wife exclaim, Arthur always takes the dog out for exercise
at eight o'clock, and he always begins to read at a quarter to nine.
So it's quite out of the question that we should, etc., etc.
And the note of absolute finality in that plaintive voice reveals the unsuspected and
ridiculous tragedy of a career.
On the other hand, a programme is a programme, and unless it is treated with deference, it
ceases to be anything but a poor joke.
To treat one's programme with exactly the right amount of deference, to live with not
too much and not too little elasticity, is scarcely the simple affair it may appear to
the inexperienced.
And still another danger is the danger of developing a policy of rush, of being gradually
more and more obsessed by what one has to do next.
In this way one may come to exist as in a prison, and one's life may cease to be one's
own.
One may take the dog out for a walk at eight o'clock, and meditate the whole time on the
And the occasional deliberate breaking of one's programme will not help to mend matters.
The evil springs not from persisting without elasticity in what one has attempted, but
from originally attempting too much, from filling one's programme till it runs over.
The only cure is to reconstitute the programme and to attempt less.
But the appetite for knowledge grows by what it feeds on, and there are men who come to
like a constant breathless hurry of endeavour.
Of them it may be said that a constant breathless hurry is better than an eternal dose.
In any case, if the programme exhibits a tendency to be oppressive, and yet one wishes not to
it, an excellent palliative is to pass with exaggerated deliberation from one portion
of it to another, for example, to spend five minutes in perfect mental quiescence between
chaining up the St. Bernard and opening the book.
In other words, to waste five minutes with the entire consciousness of wasting them.
The last, and chiefest danger which I would indicate, is one to which I have already referred,
the risk of a failure at the commencement of the enterprise.
I must insist on it.
A failure at the commencement may easily kill outright the new-born impulse towards a complete
vitality, and therefore every precaution should be observed to avoid it.
The impulse must not be overtaxed.
Let the pace of the first lap be absurdly slow, but let it be as regular as possible.
And having once decided to achieve a certain task, achieve it at all costs of tedium and
distaste.
The gain in self-confidence of having accomplished a tiresome labour is immense.
Finally, in choosing the first occupations of those evening hours, be guided by nothing
whatever but your taste and natural inclination.
It is a fine thing to be a walking encyclopedia of philosophy.
But if you happen to have no liking for philosophy, and to have a like for the natural history
of street-cries, much better leave philosophy alone and take to street-cries.
End of chapter.
End of book.
Thank you for listening.